Here's a statistic I've been thinking about recently.
In 1976, about 40% of high school seniors had read six books or more for fun in the
last year.
Only about 11% hadn't read a single book for fun.
Today, those numbers are basically reversed.
About 40% haven't read a single book for fun.
If you are looking for this, you see it everywhere right now.
There are all these headlines about how kids are not reading the way they once did.
There are all these stories quoting professors, even at Ivy Lee universities, about the way
in which when they try to assign the reading that they've been assigning their entire careers,
their students, they just can't do it anymore.
We're losing something.
We can see it on test scores that over the last decade, we just see the number of kids
reading at grade level slipping, and of course a pandemic accelerated that.
So if you were simply asking, how are the kids doing on some of these intellectual faculties
that we once thought were the core of what education was trying to promote, they're not
doing well, and then as if we summoned it, as if we wrote it into the script.
Here comes this technology, generative AI that can do it for them.
And Matt, you could read any book in less than 30 seconds no matter how long it is.
That'll read the book and summarize it for you.
Any style nonfiction book in ten minutes that'll write the essay for you.
GPT is going to do the bulk of the writing, co-pilot is good for factual information,
if GPT-0 helps you not get caught.
That'll do the math problem, even shown its work for you.
And it doesn't matter if the question is typed out or handwritten.
It works on both.
Yeah, the future is crazy.
Of course using it that way we call cheating, but to them why wouldn't you?
If you have this technology, they not only can, but will be doing so much of this for you,
for us, for the economy, why are we doing any of this at all?
And this intersects with an anxiety I have as a parent of a three and a six year old.
I don't know what the economy, what society is going to want from them in 16 or 20 years.
And if I don't know what it's going to want from them, what it's going to reward in them,
how do I know how they should be educated?
How do I know if the education I am creating for them is doing a good job?
How do I know if I'm failing them?
The purpose of education in schools is profoundly shaken to its core.
My guest today is Rebecca Winthrop.
She's the director of the Center for Universal Education at the Brookings Institute.
Her latest book, co-authored with Jenny Anderson, is The Disengage Teen.
Help the kids learn better, feel better, and live better.
As long as my email, Ezra Klein Show at NYtimes.com.
Rebecca Winthrop, welcome to the show.
Lovely to be here Ezra.
I'm a three and a six year old.
I feel like I cannot predict with AI.
What it is society will want or reward from them in 15, 16 years,
which makes this question in the interim, how should they be educated?
What should they be educated towards?
Feel really uncertain to me.
My confidence that the schools are set up now for the world they are going to graduate
into is very, very low.
So you study education, you've been thinking a lot about education and AI.
What advice would you give me?
So approximately a third of kids are deeply engaged.
Two-thirds of the kids are not.
So we need to have learning experiences that motivate kids to dig in and engage and be excited
to learn. So when friends or relatives ask me the same question,
I usually say, look, we have to think about three parts to the answer.
Why do you want your kids to be educated?
What is the purpose of education?
Because actually now that we have AI, they can write essays and pass the bar exam
and do AP exams just is good or better than kids.
We have to really rethink the purpose of education.
The second thing we have to think about is how kids learn and we know a lot about that.
And the third thing is what they should learn.
Like what's the content? What are the skills?
People always think of education as sort of a transactional transmission of knowledge,
which is one important piece of it, but it is actually so much more than that.
Learning to live with other people, learning to know yourself,
and developing the flexible competencies to be able to navigate a world of uncertainty.
Those are kind of the the wise for me.
But you know, I might ask you, what are your hopes and dreams for your kids
under the Y before we get to the details of the skills?
Well, I have a lot of hopes and dreams for my kids. I would like them to live
happy fulfilling lives. I think I'm not naive.
And certainly in my lifetime, the implicit purpose of education,
the way we say to ourselves, did this kid's education work out,
is do they get a good job?
That's really what we're, you know, pointing the arrow towards.
The fact that maybe develop their faculties as a human being,
the fact that maybe they learned things that were beautiful or fascinating,
that's all great. But if they do all that and they don't get a good job,
then we failed them. And if they do none of that, but they do get a good job,
then we succeeded. So I think that's been the reality of education.
But I was thinking that reality relies a little bit on an economy,
in which we've asked people to act very often as machines of a kind.
And now we've created these machines that can act or mimic as people of a kind.
And so now the whole transaction is being thrown into some chaos.
The skills that I think are going to be most important are how motivated and engaged
kids are to be able to learn new things. That is maybe one of the most important skills
in a time of uncertainty. That they are go getters, they're going to be wayfinders,
things are going to shift and change, and they're going to be able to navigate and constantly
learn new things and be excited to learn new things. Because when kids are motivated,
that's actually a huge predictor of how they do. And we're going to want kids
absolutely to know enough content so that they can be a judge of what is real and what is fake.
But we're also going to want them to have experiences where they're
learning and testing how to come up with creative new solutions to things,
which is not really what traditional public education has been about.
I think sometimes about this distinction between education as a virtue
and education is something that is instrumental. Education is training.
Studying the classics was important, not because it made it likelier that you got into law
school. But because it deepened your appreciation of beauty, it deepened your capacities as a human
being. And I think for reasons that make a lot of sense in many ways, we drifted away from that.
And I don't know that you build a society off of people just enjoying what they're studying.
And at the same time, I worry now we have pulled people into a conveyor belt.
They want to get to the other side of it. There's not going to be that much there.
And I don't even think you need to imagine AI for that. That's already happening to a lot of people.
I think one reason you see a lot of anger among young people today is that the deal often
doesn't come through. You do all the extracurriculars. You get your good grades. You show up on time.
And then you graduate college and the good jobs and the interesting life you're promised to start
there. And so there's something there that feels like it is getting thrown into question.
If we don't know what the future is going to ask of us, how can we be instrumental in the way we
train people for it? We can't be super instrumental. So we have to come up with a new plan.
I mean, we did not know collectively us the world that we would have generative AI.
It could basically write every, you know, seventh grade essay or college essay to get into
university or, you know, the whole host of exams that are being administered and are being passed
by AI just as well or better than kids. So we have to come up with a new plan.
Like that is not the plan for success. And we need to have kids build that muscle of doing hard
things because I worry greatly that AI will basically make a frictionist world for young people.
It's great for me. I'm loving generative AI, but I have said several decades of brain development
where I know how to do hard things. But kids are developing their brains. They're literally being
neurobiologically wired for how to attend, how to focus, how to try, how to connect ideas,
how to relate to other people. And all of those are not easy things. And I want to push back on
something you said. You said, I don't know if kids just enjoy what they're learning. It's going to
help or people are really going to benefit from that. Engagement is very powerful.
It's basically how motivated you are to really dig in and learn. And it relates to what you do.
Do you show up? Do you participate? Do you do your homework? It relates to how you feel? Do you find
school interesting? Is it exciting? Do you feel you belong at school? It relates to how you think?
Are you cognitively engaged? Are you looking at what you learn in one class, applying it to what
it might mean in your real, in your life outside or other classes? And it's also how proactive you
are about your learning. And all those dimensions really work together in education that's a very
powerful construct to predict better achievement, better grades, better mental health,
more enrollment college, better understanding of content, and lots of other benefits to boot.
So you have in your book these four modes of engagement. Do you want to talk through them?
Absolutely. So we found after three years of research that kids engage in four different ways.
Their passenger mode, kids are coasting, achiever mode. They're trying to get perfect outcomes,
resistor mode. They're avoiding and disrupting and explore mode is when they really love what
they're learning and they dig in and they're super proactive. So that's the high level framework.
What part do you want to dig in on? Well, why don't you go through them? I think passenger
mode is particularly interesting here. So why don't we start there? So passenger mode is
difficult to spot often for parents and sometimes teachers because many kids in passenger
mode get really good grades but are just bored to tears. They show up to school, they do the homework,
they have dropped out of learning. So passenger mode is when kids are really coasting doing the bare
minimum. Some signs of this are your kid comes home and they do their homework as fast as possible.
Another sign is that they say, oh, school's boring. It's just boring. I learned nothing.
Kids are in passenger mode because school is actually too easy for them. We talked to so many kids who
said, look, I'm in class and the teachers going over the math homework from yesterday and I got
everyone right and I know the answers and it's 45 minutes of that and I understand the kids who
don't get it. They need the help but I'm going to shop online or I have kids who say, well,
I got the homework home and I know how to do this stuff so I just put in chat GPT and it did my
problems set for me and then I turn it in. So that's when it's too easy. Another version of why
kids get into passenger mode is when it's too hard, schools too hard, you could have a neurodivergent
kid. Kids don't feel, you know, they belong and so they're not tuning in. They've missed certain
pieces of skill sets that they really need. Knowledge and education is cumulative in many ways
and they get kind of overwhelmed and they need particular special attention. So that's kind of
what's going on in passenger mode. One reason I wanted to start in passenger mode is that when
I think about ways AI probably is now but can be very harmful. It's the connection with that mode
because in passenger mode what you want to do and many of us have done passenger mode at work
and many of us have done it at school and some ways passenger mode was what I aspired to be at school.
I just wasn't able to achieve it but you're reading something you think is boring. You're reading
something you don't want to be reading but you want to get a good grade. So maybe at an earlier
point you would buy the spark notes. But now you just have chat GPT summarize it and more than that
you can have chat GPT write the essay. Kids are getting better at telling chat GP know you actually
were too good of an essay like dumb it down a little bit that you basically hired your own
feeling student who can help you coast and that will help you get if you're able to do it
adroitly enough decent grades but also whatever meta skills forget the knowledge whatever meta
skills are being taught how to read a book how to write an essay you're not actually learning them.
And that's I think when people think educationally about AI a bit of the fear and something that
I believe everybody believes is happening now. So how do you think about that interaction?
I think you're 100% right. I've talked to kids all all over the country. I've seen lots of
incidents or cases of highly motivated highly engaged kids who are using AI really well. They'll
write the paper themselves they'll go in and use AI for research and help them copy at it.
They're doing the thinking and they've lined up the evidence to create a thesis and they've
presented it in logical order on their own. And that is the art of thinking and that's why
we assign seventh graders to write essays or tenth graders to write essays. It's not that they're
going to create incredible works of art. It's to train them how to think logically and how to
think in steps and that is a core component of critical thinking. So as long as kids are mastering
that and the AI is helping that's a good use. But a lot of kids are using it to do exactly like you
said short cut the assignments. So an example one could I talk to said well you know this high school
for my essay. I break the prompt into three parts. I run it through three different generative AI
models. I put it together. I run it through three anti plagiarism checkers and then I turn it in.
Another kid said yeah I do it. I run it through chat GPT and then I run it through an AI humanizer
which goes in and puts typos in and makes you know your kids are getting good at something.
I'm not your toy want them getting good at but they're good at something. Kids will find a way
no matter what kids will find a way. We cannot out maneuver them with technology. So the first
response from Jenny I came in was ban it block it get anti plagiarism checkers in which are
which are bad by the way. Like I talked to one kid who showed me he had this essay
and the plagiarism checker flag 40% of it and he changed two words and then it went away. He's
all good. So you know it is worrisome. So what we need to do is shift what we're doing in our
teaching and learning experiences. I have very personally complicated feelings on this on the
question of AI and education just question of education generally. I hated school hated it did
terribly in it starting in middle school going through high school failed classes just found
the whole thing impenetrable and not because I wasn't smart not because I wasn't interested even
in things related to it just somehow the whole construct didn't work for me and I couldn't
make it work for me. It wasn't exactly that I was bored. I think today I probably could have
muscled through it but for whatever reason then I couldn't but I was voracious outside of school.
I spent three or four nights a week at Barnes & Noble's. I loved reading deeply into things that
I was interested in and I've related the story before and one of the sort of reactions I get is
you should really then recognize the way school fails kids and in a way I do but it's just not
obvious to me at all that school should be tuned for me. One thing that I recognize as I'm new
studies bureaucracies is that if you just think of US public education to say nothing of
also private education to say nothing of global education it's educating a lot of kids
and it's ability to tune itself to every kid is going to be pretty modest and what kids need
is different but somehow you have to be orienting towards something that works for most of them
even if you're not sure how to make it work for all of them. I'm curious how you think about that.
I am not sure I agree. I think you I agree with several things one you are not alone there are
many many kids currently today are going through the system and feel like you to I agree with you
that as sort of a bureaucratic system that is actually quite miraculous if you think about it
like in every community across our country kids as young as three to 18 at the same time of day
are getting themselves to a place Monday through Friday for a certain amount of days in the year.
I mean that is a that is an organizational feat and the thing I don't agree with is that once
you're there you just have to design for the mean in the average. I think there's lots of examples
that are relatively big scale that are at least not just one you know little school in a corner
by one fabulous you know home spun teacher that do things differently and I think it actually
just gets down to how we orchestrate teaching and learning experiences. Give me one of those examples
one of those examples of a schooling system able to educate in a personalized way at scale
that seems to you to be replicable. I'll give you a couple so there's an example of schools in
North Dakota that have created studios for their adolescence and what are studios. They are self-created
classes that a student can design and so and they have to tell you or tell the teacher what standards
they're meeting. I'll give you an example we have a great character in the book I've done with
Jenny Anderson the disengaged teen named Kia and she was totally disengaged doom scrolling
in middle school and then these studios showed up she got super into it because she was learning
history and science and she decided to design an escape room and she had to list out for herself.
These are the standards I'm meeting for whatever grade she was in 10th grade I think
history and science and she did an escape room around the assassination of Abraham Lincoln
and John of Kennedy but she had to design this escape room that turned her on like nobody else
and the she she got super excited and she did several of those and then and then she actually
said she was so motivated she went back to sort of normal classes they're doing that across the
district that's one small example there's other examples of schools that you know do really
if we're talking about AI do sort of tech based education on core subjects for a couple hours
a day math science reading social studies and then for the rest of the day they are doing projects
together on whatever it may be that they so decide and there's a curriculum there's things you
know the teachers want them to learn it's not a every kid do whatever you want but that's super
motivating there's no reason that we couldn't do that with the existing staff and people and school
buildings and infrastructure we just have to have the willpower to decide to do things differently.
I want to zoom in on something in that story which is that when the student you
brought up found the thing that lit her up she was then able to to do better in in all the other
classes it maybe didn't this was a little bit of my own experience of life for me was political
blocking of all things which I found as a freshman in college and once I activated then I
became much better at doing things that I didn't want to do or didn't exactly see the point of
in even unrelated fields I love that so you started political blogging and then what happened
I think the way you what would have been the the conventional line on me from the adults who knew me
was smart kid can't get it together right just can't seem to get the homework in right can't
seem to do things he's not that interested in doing and can't even seem to do things he is
interested in doing in a way that fits what we want from him I read every book in English class
and I enjoy doing the essays and I'm a good writer I think I'm willing to say that at this point
to my life I think you're allowed and I still did badly on the essays because it wasn't what they
wanted for me in some way or another right and over time I just don't have that I mean that was
the broad experience of my life that I couldn't fit what I did to what the world wanted for me
right and now I'm just much better at doing that in a in ways that are not related to my my
course of interest I'm not trying to over extrapolate my experiences actually important to be not
to over extrapolate my experience but something I've seen you talk about is this this quality of
when students find the teacher find the subject find the approach that activates them
that all of a sudden the things that are not that activating to them become become easier that
there is a sort of lock in a key dynamic there is and this is something we talk about around
finding your spark kids need to find their spark and they may have many sparks and their sparks may
change but when kids find their spark for Kia was this idea of doing an escape room around
historical residential assassinations she got excited other students they find sparks and other
places one of the characters in our book Samir absolutely loved local politics and dove in getting
himself on the school board ultimately in high school another student Mateo was super excited and
turned on by robotics and that's what really turned them around and when you're motivated this
internal drive it makes you engage more you lean in more you enjoy it more there's a virtuous upward
cycle and there's lots of evidence to show that it often spills over so Kia talks about doing these
studios for a couple years which really helped her reengage and care about school and then she
went back and did some high school college credit courses which were very sort of you know
traditional structure and she said she didn't love the structure but she had enough
motivation to figure out how to bend the class to her interests so that's the best case scenario
it doesn't always spill over automatically what you talked about when you said you enjoyed it you
loved it you loved English but you didn't give the teachers what they want it's probably because
you're a total explorer and we do not reward engaging in school in a way that supports explorers
in general and that is what we have to change so then this gets to the AI Optimus case and I
take the app to miss case is something like this it's pretty hard to do personalized learning even
if you have examples that that you've seen work because you have one teacher it's a classroom of
20 30 kids oftentimes but AI makes this completely different AI gives you more tutors and there
are children it allows you to have tutors who adapt to that kids individual learning style in
any way you wanted to in any way they wanted to if this kid is a visual learner it can do visual
learning if pop quizzes are helpful for them they can do pop quizzes it can turn it into a podcast
they listen to if you you know are more audio focused everything can be turned into a poem if
you absorb information better through the sonnet form that as we get better at this and as we
build these systems and tune them better although they're already pretty capable here that our
ability to personalize education using artificial intelligence as tutors will be like nothing
ever seen before in human history it's a complete quantum leap in educational possibility
and as such it allows you to bring every child into their educational utopia whatever that is
to spark them to turn them on to make them into an explorer how do you feel about that more utopic
vision I think we're on the same page we schools exist they're important they're important for many
reasons we need to change what we do inside of them particularly because of gen ai and we need to do
it quickly in addition to I would say you know regulating gen ai so it isn't so massively in students
and young people's hands without being designed for that purpose I would say those are the two big
things we need to do but I don't think our goal inside schools when we're educating young people
is to have a 100% personalized learning journey for every kid what I think you're talking about is
actually the ability for gen ai to help teachers which I think is very real I think there's a big
difference and we need to make a big distinction between ai supporting educators and doing what they do
versus going direct to young people well let me push you on this for a second before you go here because
if I'm taken the position of the ai optimist what I'd say is no I'm not saying that I'm saying
the ai will be better than the teachers better at what if we are saying that ai is going to be
better than the median for many people at many kinds of work why would we not assume that
this system we'll be able to build in six years given how fast these things are developing
won't per kid be better than the teacher I'm not saying I believe this but I want to make
you know you're pushing on it I get it but the question is better at what so teachers do many many
things kids learn in relationships with other humans we've evolved to do that I do not think
that we will go away from that or we may go away and then we'll be like oh my god that was a huge
mistake and ten years later go back so there's a question around skill development and knowledge
transmission that is one thing a teacher does and I think that's what you're talking about that
is an area where I think technology can be good can be really good so and actually we see it even
without gender of ai there's adaptive learning software you know that helps kids really you know learn
to read which is incredibly helpful especially if you have access gaps you don't have good teachers
you have large classes you have substitute teachers that aren't trained on on how to teach kids
to read so that complemented with things that motivate kids get them excited and see the relevance
of what they're doing which is often in person could be a great could be a great thing to do inside
the classroom we we see private schools doing that there's a group of schools that I've not
visited and I don't know up close but alpha schools are doing this they do and they've been doing
it for 10 years actually pre gen ai they do a couple couple hours of sort of adaptive learning
on key academic subjects and then the rest of the time kids are working together to build bridges
or learn about financial literacy or play sports or identify a passion that they want to go learn
about in their communities together it's alone what we don't want to do is bring ai in and have
every kid sitting in front of a ai tutor alone at their desk for eight hours a day that that's not
the future that is going to help our kids I guess another way you might think about it is that
this changes the job of the teacher quite substantially absolutely so and I will say I think I
don't believe what I'm about to say so I don't want to get yelled at by everybody for for every
take I'm not talking to you I'm talking to my beloved audience um I have a love it audience
fair enough uh but one thing I've observed is that it seems to me that where ai is going to push
is towards the skills of the manager the editor the supervisor the fact checker in a way
and often away from the skills which are right now more numerous and needed in more numerous
quantities of the worker of the writer of in this case maybe the teacher so if you think about that
that world that you were just describing is the one we don't want a second to go where you have
25 kids in a class they're all staring at a screen they're all working with an individualized
tutor right you could imagine a world if you think about every one of those screens as a junior
teacher as an individual tutor that there's some master teacher in the room who the kids can go talk
to who can like be pulled in to sort of oversee the learning to reshape what's happening there is
testing there there are things are trying to help us evaluate how the kids are doing but the
teacher who's already managing a classroom of students is now also in a way managing a
classroom of helpers of tutors i think that would be the kind of vision you would hear
from the more ai piled among us right the role of the teacher in traditional public schools is
damn near impossible honestly they have to master certain subject they have to get kids to grade level
so if you have and usually we have a wide difference of grade of grade levels in school between
three and four different grade levels so they've got a different shade and figure out who needs
what the board kid who's the passenger the struggling kid who's also the passenger both of those
silent and quiet and you don't even know and they've got to manage classroom dynamics like kids
have to not you know hit each other or disrupt each other or ruin the furniture and they have to
increasingly be social workers kids are not doing well lots of mental health problems they've got a
spot that they've got to help but they also have to be relationship managers they've got to work with
parents etc so it's very hard for one teacher to do this all absolutely i think the wave of the
future is a different model where you have multiple people and one of those could be an ai tutor
helping support our kids growth and development the interaction with AI
can help with skill development knowledge acquisition but that is one slice of what happens in
a classroom and it is one slice of what it really means for kids to be educated kids are learning
all sorts of things in a classroom they're learning how to self-regulate emotions in a group
they're learning how to understand different perspectives from kids who are different from themselves
they're they're learning you know how to ask for help when they need it there's a whole bunch of
things that kids are kids are learning that is much more person to person that we want to maintain
i would argue here's where i actually am i think we've just been going through
a catastrophic experiment with screens and children and right now i think we're starting to
figure out that this was a bad idea and schools are banning phones my sense is that they are not
relying very much on laptops and iPads there's a big vogue for a while if every kid gets their own
uh laptop or tablet i think that's beginning to go away if i'm reading the the tea leaves of
this right and so i feel a bit better about that as a parent of young kids i really feel badly
for the parents whose kids have been navigating this over the past 10 or 15 10 years let's call it
and right now i see i coming and i don't think we understand it at all i know that we understand how
to teach with it i don't think the studies we're doing right now are good studies yet there are too
many other effects we're not going to be measuring i think there's the the sort of narrow thing that a
program does and then what it does for a kid to be staring at a screen all the time in a deeper way
i believe human beings are embodied and if you made me choose between sending my kids to a school
that is no screens at all and one that is trying the latest in AI technology i would send them to
school no screens at all in a second but we're gonna be working through this somehow and what
scares me putting aside what world my kids graduate into is in moving into schools at the exact
time that they don't know what the hell to do with this technology and they're about to try a lot
of things that don't work and probably try it badly and i wonder as somebody's tracked this what
you think the lessons of what i consider at least the screens and phones debacle of the 2010s
or the 2000s have been i agree with you 100 percent it was a massive uncontrolled experiment
and our kids were the guinea pigs we just had a wait and see approach we cannot take a wait and
see approach again and i think that there's lots of lessons i would say first off do not
use generative AI unless you really know what you're using it for there is a real sense of
phomo among educators parents young people even that there's this thing happening out there and
i i should use it because it's the newest thing i saw that with groups who were working on student
well-being and they had done teacher training around well-being curriculum for teachers and they
said oh we need to train parents how to do it so their idea was let's use generative it'll be great
because parents also you know do need to reinforce well-being messages that teachers are giving
in school which is true and what we'll do is we'll create an app and so this is what they had
suggested as or imagine you sitting down around the dinner table you pull up your phone and you
have an app and your kids have their phone and you say okay how are you feeling today
and um you know you're looking at your phone and they're telling you how they feel and then you
click through and ask you know why why are you feeling that way like mediated through a phone it's
crazy it's crazy like we've lost our mind like that we need AI to talk to our kids so you know if
you don't need if there's not a real problem you're trying to solve don't use it is number one
number two any I really do believe this any company that wants to work with kids in schools
should be a benefit corporation because legally you have a lot of companies who are creating
perhaps really good stuff if used well that they have to maximize profits they can't maximize
social benefit and well-being well one thing that worries me is the way in which this might maybe
already has been widened the inequality between parents who could pay for private schools and
parents who can't and what I mean by that is that private schools can just adapt more quickly
they are not dealing with they don't have to go through legislatures and have the boards and
they're they're just a little bit more independent they can take the screens out they can put them in
they can limit what comes in whereas the public school systems tend to be somewhat more slow moving
I just knew living out in the Bay area a lot of tech people who were paying money to send their
kids to private schools that had banned the products they made starting many years ago
and the rest of everybody were sending to public schools it had not done that
and when things are very very fast moving being able to be fast moving is really important
so somebody who cares a lot about public education what should the orientation of the public schools be
how do they sort of not seem to parents who think there's something that there's
kids should be getting out of this don't the kids need to know how to use AI
so they're going to need to attract parents on that level but also
how do they not end up flat-footed if this is turning out to be a disaster
this is a really tricky question and you you point on something that is a real issue
which is around the deep equity issues that have already emerged so think about
the schools that ban AI for a kid who has no access to AI at home versus a kid who goes home
and has full access to all the AI tools that right there is a huge cleavage in our country it also
um there's a huge equity gap in terms of language
large language models work off of language that is written down there's a lot of languages
that aren't written down that much they have very little written down and so there you're seeing
a global gap across the globe um between sort of African and Indigenous languages are
and communities versus English speaking or other large languages so there is a equity is a
is a huge one your question about sort of public versus private I would say to public education
systems do do not have FOMO because that is what the gut instinct is when a new technology comes
I'm missing out I have a fear of missing out and I need to adopt it and I see this so don't have
FOMO don't use it unless it's a real problem you want to solve do give it to the adults in the
school building give it to teachers have them use it and figure out how it will help them today
then give it to sort of really you know novel school leaders to think about how they could maybe
restructure the teaching and learning experiences what are the things that AI can do there's
a so much that um AI could actually do to help make public schools work better bus schedules
calendaring school meals cafeteria I mean you know assessment input there's so much time that
could be really freed up let me try to sharpen the FOMO argument or the argument that will be
used to give people FOMO the argument goes something like this if AI is a very potent technology
that's going to be integrated into virtually everything in the future not literally everything
but but quite a lot then not just your literacy but your competency in it
becomes paramount you're not going to be replaced by an AI you're going to be replaced by a
person who knows how to use AI and so what you need to learn is to use the AI you need to learn
how to manage it how to prompt it a sense of what a can and can't do and there's no way to do that
other than relentless familiarity and experimentation and exposure and so a kid who goes to
some bloodite school or when they're young the toys are made out of wood and when they're older
the books are all printed on paper and there's not a gen AI insight is going to lose out
and it will be like having not taught them mathematics right we're having not taught them how to
drive or something of that or how to type right how do you take that argument I think it
is 50% right and I think the 50% depends on the age of the child I absolutely 100% think you
should send your kids to the Waldorf school with a wood blocks and when they're young you know we
know that kids early childhood the more screen time they have the less language acquisition they
have we know that you know babies when your when infants are learning language they learn a lot of
language from human to human contact and when you put the same sentences on a on a screen they don't
learn it our neurobiology is not going to change in you know five years so we have to work with
that's the only confines I think we really have to work within everything else I think we can be
imagined but it's true that when kids get older and you do want to teach AI literacy when
kids understand this is true for social media too when kids sort of learn about oh these big
companies are you know trying to addict me they're I doing it for free but I get you know with my
attention and staying on it longer is how they make money you get you tell that to teenagers actually
there's been great research on this and they get pissed off I think we need to do the same with AI
literacy like this is how it works it's not some magical thing it's not another human being so
when kids go older we need to teach them about that and then they need when they get older they need
to start playing with it playing with it using it but my huge caveat is with AI that is designed for
kids right now there is a spring fling race by the large AI labs to get students to sign up
you've got chat GPT giving two months free of GPT plus then you got XAI come in two months free
for supergrab and then Google not to be outdone is like well you can get a month you can get a
year free and I'll give you two terabytes of storage and these are largely for college students
and Google just made Gemini available for for kids through through parents with family plan and
they are racing to get allegiance of young kids this is terrible because those products are not
designed for children and for learning I guess then they're to go back to your equity point
there's the argument from the opposite direction in equity which is that it is the kids with the
least access to all kinds of enrichment materials to tutors I mean we know what rich kids in urban
centers get and then what you're getting I mean you know in parts of America that are rural and
don't yet have broadband or don't have wide access to broadband to say nothing of you know kid
in Nigeria in rural Nigeria that that is where at least a well structured GNII tutor might be
able to make a difference really fast you've talked a bit about a study in Nigeria that I never
quite know how to how seriously to take these studies yet but but why don't you say what it
what it did and what I found so I think that AI has real potential for very specific use cases
particularly around access gaps and in Nigeria what was done was after school twice a week
an AI tutor helped kids learn English and it was for six weeks which is not long was
June July I think moves a randomized controlled trial we're still waiting for all the evidence to
come through but point three standard deviations which is pretty good equivalent to maybe two years
of average sort of English learning and you know we see that difference with other technologies too
it doesn't have to be GNI it can be rule-based AI it could be predictive AI we've seen sort of similar
benefits for example in Malawi teaching literacy and numeracy to kids with offline tablets
where teachers have maybe 80 to 100 kids in a class and each kid is having sort of
personalized adaptive learning experience that is hugely beneficial as well so that's one use case
another use case that I think is really great is neurodivergent kids super helpful
there's all sorts of kids that have different learning differences that struggle in school don't
have access to the specialists that they need that would benefit greatly from you know being in a
classroom where they could have a little assistant to help them navigate we I see my my youngest
son has dyslexia and they the sort of read and write text-to-speech speech to text has been
game-changing for him there's also use cases here in the US you see AI being used and experimented
around supporting wellness advisors who kind of fill the gap for school counselors in rural
school districts for example where they don't have school counselors which is actually an
actual person but AI is boosting that person's ability to have a helpful conversation with a kid
and it's bringing through tech mental health resource into a community that didn't have one so
there's lots of use cases actually if done well contained well designed well and we have adult you
know we humans have our hand on the steering wheel Ethan Mala who's an AI expert he's got this idea
that has been influential for me about the best available human is AI better for you in a certain
purpose not than the best human but the best human available to you at a given moment exactly
yes having a professional excellent editor like my editor at the New York Times would be better
but most people don't have that available so AI is better than the best trail better to them
there's a lot more demand for therapy than there are therapists so oftentimes AI is you know
in particularly where it's going even for me sometimes it's a better therapist than the best
available therapist I have available at a given moment it's really seems plausibly true
in education too there's all kinds of times when you are confused by what you are reading
what you are learning yep and you're in a big class and it's embarrassing to ask 55 questions or
there's even time to ask 55 questions and you don't want to seem stupid but if you could contain
the system somehow and that seems more plausible here where there's a fundamental prompt at the
core of them right then you know if we got that right it you know in a lot of these use cases it
could be really absolutely and the key is what you said contain the system we can't sort of
just bring commercial tech into our schools and hope it will solve these problems it has to have
guardrails we have to make sure that the data that's it's being trained on is legit and not
going to create harmful prompts for kids we've seen terrible things with commercial AI companions
with young young people you know developing relationships and being you know really manipulated
emotionally but you can put guardrails it's totally possible it's just where who what the frankly
gets back to the the incentives it gets back to the business model and which is where you you know
regulation and government could and should step in so yes if contained is the question
so then let me ask you about the other impulse somebody might have which is not that you're
going to be replaced by somebody who knows how to use AI but that in a world where we have AI's
the most important thing for human beings to be is as human as possible and that what we need to do
is return to more classical education that what we need to do is be reading the great books
developing the attentional faculties that a lot of data and anecdotes suggest that even very elite
students are losing to read a long book and think about it to write a long essay to be educated in
the way that was considered high civilization education 70 years ago and you might get at a St.
Johns or a U of Chicago or certain private schools today but actually what we should do is retreat
somewhat school should be a place not where we learn how to partner with machines because the
rest of society is going to tell you how to do that school should be a place where we develop
specifically human faculties such that we are capable and flexible and attentive in moving
through a world that we just cannot predict we 100% want kids to have the capacity for deep
attention and you're thinking about your own kiddos who are young and I'm thinking about my own
teenagers who are 13 and 16 and I see the undermining of attentive faculties from when my 16 year old
got his phone for a long time he didn't want a phone because I'd been droning on and on for years
because he has me as a mother about addiction and opportunity costs and just that you know it's okay
to enjoy it a little bit but you know can't sacrifice sleep and physical exercise and in person
you know communication and then he did get his phone and he struggles with it and he says mom
this is really hard like it's eroding his ability to do his homework or to follow follow something
he wants to do the only thing that it doesn't seem to distract him from doing his playing the piano
because he loves playing the piano so anything that we can do to actually ensure young people are
developing the muscle and it's not just attention and attention is the entry point that's the
doorway that gets you through it's actually reflection and meaning making which is what you get
from deep reading and reading full books which a lot of young people struggle to do today
you also can get it from other means you could get it from long socratic dialogues in community
with diverse people over time but it has to be an experience where you reflect you think about
meaning you think about different perspectives and it changes how you see the world
but what do you think about this idea that school should be a rare screen free oasis
in a child's life I've sometimes imagined a school that you know I could send my kids to I'm not
saying it exists just yes yes yes where what they do is they go in and you know somebody is watching
them and helping them read books and think through math and there's long periods and they have a
certain amount of exploratory capacity in that right you can choose between different books you can
but that the idea that maybe one space in their life would just be a place it is trying to
encourage in them that capacity for meaning making for deep attention for deep contemplation
it seems to me to be more valuable than it seems to be to other people to just have a teacher
sit there and watch kids read for an hour and a half at a time and then there's a discussion
then to do a lot of what we do in school and so this idea of schools is as explicitly counter
to the trends of the moment because they need to develop things at the moment will not naturally
develop how do you think about that I think that's right I actually think if I had to choose for
my own kids and and I do we would have you know a school that has no no phones
for all the reasons we know and Jonathan Height has done a great job on on you know sort of
catalyzing that movement here in the US and bringing it from across the globe to our schools
I think today we should have cell phone bands in school bell to bell don't don't have it at recess
because that's where you start interacting and playing with kids and I think we should
make school a place where kids can actually interact with each other have developed
human to human socialization capacities because there is massive commercial tech the minute
they leave school that is vying for their attention and coming for them and make sure make sure
to do some high quality AI literacy AI literacy is way way different than using AI to learn AI
literacy is what is this how was it made what are the risks what are the benefits and let's talk
about what how our ethics around this new tool and and how to incorporate it into our lives you
with an with an adult instructor talking about how it works and what it is I think that would
that's AI literacy and that's important I hope you're right I've been in general very skeptical
of how much literacy will do but I guess this goes back to I mean where is the question how much
we will do well but your your question is will it make a difference I'm is I'm as phone
literate as I think you can almost be I've been writing about this for years yeah I'm
functionally extremist on this issue and still the only way for me to modulate my own use to the
point I would like to is to use a device that hobbles my phone the brick every time I touch it
to the RFID chip and then if I don't do that you'll be able to see in the world I have known John
height for many many years he's been on this show I've read the next generation yes it doesn't
do me that much good because there's just not how the the brain works any any more than knowing
that I shouldn't eat so many Oreos keeps you from eating them if they're on the table in front of me
and I think you bring something up that's really important which is you know these things
need to be regulated it's ridiculous that they're out there being used by kids like and it's
ridiculous to say as or it's your willpower that should be the deciding factor it's ridiculous for
adults it's ridiculous for kids these are incredibly seductive technologies so what I you know I
this is this is a really tough one for me around because you do want kids to be fluent in the new
technology of the time and you do want them to have an ethics and awareness about it you don't
want them to be seduced by it the large AI labs are perfectly capable perfectly capable if they
wanted to of creating a gen AI product that is designed for kids that will not be as seductive
it's interesting I was just thinking about that and I wonder I think they are
but I also wouldn't overstate how well they even understand what it is they are doing
they don't fully understand the systems are making now the kids are more I mean relentlessly the
kids are more capable and ingenious than you know the eight or 40 or a hundred developers on any given
probably when you're building something that has a small number of hundreds of people building it
and then it's used by 40,000 kids I think our experience is it they are clever in ways typically
that you are not I do think that over time we can create things that are that are curved it's just
that I'm not sure we even know exactly what we are targeting what we are creating well I would say
they're the they have to change how they're developing the products you can't create an AI that
will be great for kids and teachers and teaching and learning without having teachers and kids
and education experts and child development experts in the development process with you
and so few are so I think about what the Dutch government is doing they're doing a partnership with
sort of the teacher unions and the academics and the tech companies and they're having a little lab
to figure out how to you know what would AI look like in in schools but any of that sort of bottom
up experimentation is is a way to go before you roll it out because most AI developers although
they might be good people they're not child development specialists but if they change the way they
develop their products they could so then I want to go back to to where we began which is you know
you've got young kids now they're going to be going into school in the age of Gen AI how should you
think about their schooling so we can't really predict the shape of society in 15 or 20 years I don't
think that's a question we could answer on the show if we could we should probably investing not
podcasting but what we have in education now is constant markers that are supposed to tell us
as parents how well our kids education is going and that's basically grades and maybe to
some degree counselor reports and the idea is if they get good grades and they seem happy and
all-justed then at the end of that process they'll go to good college or you know go to a trade
school and get a good job and and it's going to be a pretty straight line all A is equal good job
the future is foggier what they will need to know is maybe a little foggier what then should a
parent be trying to watch in the meantime how do you think about whether or not your kids' education
is going well if you're a little suspicious that the grades designed for and maybe even not
that well designed for the society we have had are not going to correlate all that well to this
society we will have and I think as a parent you yourself but also other parents out there
are right to be suspicious because I think that linear line is going to be much more complicated
as the years go on with AI in our world so what I would think about is a couple of things one
getting back to the research I've done with my co-author and colleague Jenny Anderson grades don't
show you how much kids are engaged schools are not designed to give kids agency schools are designed
to help kids comply and it's actually not really the fault of the teacher teachers are
squished from above with all sorts of standards and squished from below with parents you know
putting a lot of pressure on you know teachers about their kids performance and outcome and
what you really want is some feedback loops that are beyond just grades and behavior like
to know is my kid developing agency over their learning and what I mean by that is are they
able to reflect and think about things they're learning in a way that they can identify what's
interesting and they can have the skills to pursue new information that right there is I think
going to be the core skill it is the core skill for learning new things in an uncertain world which
is I think one of the number one things we think about in addition to that I would say
make sure kids are learning to interact with other human beings any school that has I'm working
with peers but even connecting with community members our social networks are getting smaller
there's going to be a premium on human to human interaction as more and more skills get automated
and done by AI by AI which are the more knowledge sort of cognitive tasks the sort of interpersonal
caregiving teaching you know skills are going to continue to be important for some for some time
I'm not sure for how long but for some time and then the last thing which may seem silly to you
but I increasingly keep thinking about is think about speaking listening and speaking as the
missing piece of literacy alongside reading and writing we are going to need to show our merit and
our sort of credentials more and more through what the British call oracy skills you know
I think we've lost the art of listening and speaking I think that's a good place to end thank
you for speaking listening with me always a final question what are three books you'd recommend
to the audience so the first one is democracy and education by John Dewey which is over a hundred
years old and we are now seeing through lots of great neuroscience that his observations around
the teaching and learning experience and what makes for a good teaching and learning experience
were right he has some great discussions around the importance of reflection not just
ingesting knowledge but reflecting on it making meaning figuring out how to do things with it
and I love it because you know we didn't talk about this as we're much but the role of schools
in our society are more than just you're in my kids education and getting a job even though
that's what we care about most as a parent they are about creating a democratic society or not
so that that's an oldie but goodie I love it John Dewey the second book is by Gaya Bernstein it's
called unwired gaining control over addictive technologies she's a law professor it's
seen Hall University and she I really enjoy this book because it gives a really good sort of
overview particularly around kids and young people of the incentives that commercial tech has
and how we need to sort of what are some strategies for resisting that and getting to a better place
and the last one it's called blueprint for revolution how to use rice pudding lego men and other
nonviolent techniques to galvanize communities over their dictators or simply change the world
by surja popovich who is this was the student sort of leader Serbian student leader that
started a movement to overthrow sloban alosavitch and now is doing quite a bit of work on nonviolent
protest against authoritarianism and to me this book is sort of like the updated version of nonviolent
activism he really gets media he really gets social media and I just think it's incredibly
relevant today Rebecca with up thank you very much thank you
