Traditional school is broken. It's outdated, full of busy work, and sadly for our
kids, often a waste of time. But what if I told you there's a school where
students focused on academics for only two hours a day, but still easily out
performed their peers in traditional school? And what if I told you the school
has no teachers? And students learn academics through an AI tutor, on AI apps that
give each student a one-to-one personalized mastery-based academic journey. They
guarantee success. My name is Mackenzie Price and I'm the co-founder of Two
Hour Learning, a revolutionary new learning model that is transforming
education as we know it. In the next few minutes, I'm going to dive into this
concept of Two Hour Learning, showing you how it works and the academic results
you can expect. We are going to use data from Alpha School, the flagship
campus that first implemented Two Hour Learning. At Alpha, we commit to parents
that their child will learn twice as much in two hours per day as they would
in six hours of traditional school.
Before we begin, I want to start with a couple disclaimers. First, some people are
looking for a magic software edtech solution. This is not it. We believe that edtech
is only 10% of the solution while 90% is having a motivated student. We don't have
academic teachers with Two Hour Learning. Instead, we have guides and they spend
their day motivating and supporting students as they become self-driven
learners. The other key to motivation into our learning is that we give students
their most valuable resource back time. They spend only two hours in school
doing academics and the rest of the school day is spent developing life
skills like leadership, teamwork, public speaking, financial literacy, entrepreneurship,
and socialization by doing engaging active workshops. Second, this system doesn't
work for everyone. We find it works great for 80 to 90% of kids. Let's jump into
the results. These are phenomenal results that often lead to some skepticism
and I will dive deep into the how so you can understand how it works. We are
going to start with our standardized test results. Map is a nationwide
standardized test that millions of students take. This is the third-party test
we tell parents to use to hold us accountable for K through 8. We use SAT and
advanced placement tests for high school. This map report is for grades K through
8 for the 2023-24 school year. This shows how we did at each grade level and in
each subject. If you look at the spring achievement column which measures how
much a student knows, you can see that most of our classes are in the top 1% for
every subject. Amazing results for school with no academic teachers. Here it is
in another format. One of the first questions we often get is how do you measure
to ex-learning? We use map as our third-party grader. Map measures how much
students learn each year. At Alpha, we will double those scores. Let's take a
couple examples. As you can see in this grid, the 50th percentile fifth grader
goes up 4 points in math in a year. At Alpha, that student will go up 8 points or
the 99th percentile seventh grader goes up 7 points. At Alpha, that student will
go up 14 points. That grid is for all grades, all percentiles. Here is an
individual student. We take these map tests three times a year to track learning.
Let's segment this map data to show different cohorts. This first one is by
achievement. Our average student was just over 2x learning. Our top two-thirds
average 2.6 times and our top 20 percent average almost four times faster
learning. How do advanced students do at Alpha? This is a chart of students age
grade level versus their knowledge grade level as determined by map. We put
the student in the highest knowledge grade where they are still in the top
10 percent in the nation. These results are unbelievable to most parents. All we
can say is your child is capable of so much more than they are doing. They just
aren't given the material in traditional school. With an AI tutor, students can
move as fast as they are capable of learning. The sky is the limit. What if a
student is behind? Our model excels at taking children who are behind and
enabling them to catch up. Here are the results from a group of seven boys who
were two years behind and needed to catch up. They learned 4.6 times faster and
completed two entire grade levels in six months. What about low SES students?
Alpha has a campus in Brownville, Texas which has one of the poor school
districts in the country. Our low SES students there learn 2.1 times faster.
Here's the thing about an AI tutor. It doesn't care if a student is white, black,
or brown. It doesn't care if a student is rich or poor. It doesn't care if a
student is in the 15th percentile or the 85th percentile. It is infinitely
patient. We are often asked if kindergarteners can really use AI tutors and
apps. When we started Alpha, we didn't have a kindergarten class because we
thought they were too young to learn via apps. We found out we were wrong and our
youngest learners excel in this environment. These are the map scores for our
kindergarten class at the end of the year. As you can see, almost all of the
students are in the top 1 percent, both in how much they know and how fast they
are learning. I know we are focused on kindergarten through eighth grade, but I
want to spend a little bit of time on high school. These are our students who have
been using to our learning the longest. In some cases, they haven't had
an academic teacher in 10 years. In high school, map is not as relevant.
SAT and advanced placement are the standardized tests we use. Our average SAT
score is 1470, 90 percent of our students get fours or fives on APs. We had our
first graduating class this year, only a dozen, and we discovered that colleges
love these self-driven learners. They were accepted at Stanford, Vanderbilt,
USC, UCL London, NYU Shanghai, the University of Texas, University of Austin,
Howard University, Northeastern, and FIT. Half were national merit scholars or
commended scholars, five were AP scholars with distinction, highest honor. These
academic results across K through 12 are amazing. And the next thought is, wow,
you must burn these kids out with tons of class time and tons of homework. Well,
here are the actual number of hours that Alpha students spend each day on their
academics. As you can see, the average is less than two hours a day. On the left
side, you see that some students are over two hours, but not one is over three.
Those students over two are either catching up or getting way ahead. This is
where the crazy disbelief hits. How can they be learning so much and doing it in
so little time? Our experience as parents and the schooling that we went through
makes us seem impossible. So, that leads to the next part. Why and how does this
work? First of all, a disclaimer. This has been a process that we have been working
through for the past 10 years since our first school opened in 2014. And we are
presenting it as super crisp and clean, but it is a messy process. We tell parents
to expect results, not polish. I want to set expectations that to our learning is
leading edge. And there are hiccups in the technology, but we deliver the results
you have just seen even when the tech glitches. Thousands of learning science papers have
been written about how students can best learn. Benjamin Blooms, two Sigma
problem, is a seminal paper. His research came out 40 years ago when I was in
grade school. All of these papers describe how students can learn two times, five
times, ten times faster. Unfortunately, all of these papers start or end with this
doesn't work in a standard teacher in front of a classroom model. This is the
core of how we work. You have to take the teacher in front of the classroom out.
No one has ever been willing to do this before. Can you imagine starting a school
and saying, we are going to have any academic teachers? Well, we did. And hundreds
of Alpha, Austin parents were willing to make their kids guinea pigs for the
past ten years, which is what enabled this to happen. Thanks to them, your child
can take advantage of this. Let's take two learning science examples. We will use
ones from Blooms to Sigma paper. Individualized tutoring and individualized
learning plans. Example number one of why the teacher in front of the classroom
model doesn't work. 80% of a standard school classroom, especially post-COVID,
does not have the same background knowledge. Some students are behind, some are
grade level, and some are ahead. A teacher can't possibly give individual lessons
to each kid when they have a group of 20 plus students, but an AI tutor can. For
example, we had a new eighth grader join the school who was behind academically.
Though she and her parents weren't really certain how big of an issue it was. But if
we put this student in eighth grade material based on her age in year in
school, it's going to be too hard and the student will quickly feel stupid.
Instead, the AI tutor was able to assess where she should be and put her in fifth
grade material. Putting a student in the right level of material and providing
them with an individualized learning plan instills confidence, shows they have
the ability to learn and with one extra hour of work can catch up to grade
level. This student was able to move up quickly from fifth grade and by the end
of her first year at Alpha, she was academically ready for high school, which saved
years of struggle for her. Mastery. Example number two, why the teacher in
front of the classroom model doesn't work. Mastery learning is a well-known
learning science concept that boils down to, don't put students in
material that's over their head. If you have a master of the basics, don't do the
advanced. This requires that you give the student as much time as required to
master the material before moving them on. Unfortunately, a standard teacher and
from the classroom model can't handle that. The teacher has to teach a lesson
plan each day, moving on to new concepts as the school year progresses. If some
students don't understand or sort of understand, the teacher still needs to
move on. This leads to students who only understand 70 to 75% of the material
being pushed into more advanced lessons, where they get stuck and discouraged. If
you can only get 70% of division problems correct, you're gonna really struggle
in fractions, which require mastery of division and multiplication. So that is
the learning science theory behind why two hour learning works. By learning
with an AI tutor, students receive individualized learning plans that allow
them to learn at the pace and level that works for them and they learn a mastery.
Now let's get real tactical and detailed. How long does it take to learn a
subject? In standard school, there are 180 school days, usually an hour a day in
class plus homework. Here's an alpha chart of the number of lessons in each grade.
How long each lesson takes and total time by students. As you can see, third grade
language has about 100 lessons. You also see that the average student only takes
16 minutes to do each lesson and the total number of hours to do all the
lessons is 40 hours. Now I can tell that some of you are in the fast math group.
You want to point out that it should only take about 25 hours, not 40 hours. Why
are they different? Well, when students get stuck in a lesson, the AI
struggle detector will help the student by giving them some easier lessons that
help them through their stuck points. So students end up doing more than the
minimum lessons and some days the student might not be focused. They're messing
around, they're distracted, just not feeling it. But on average, they can finish
the entire grade level in 40 hours. Let's break that down. If we used one hour
classes, the students would be finished in less than two months. We only use 30
minutes, so it takes 80 days for the student to finish. There are 180 days in the
school year, so a student needs to finish a grade in 90 days if they're going to
do two grades in one year. 80 days fits comfortably in the 90. Take some test
days and absences, etc. You can see it's doable. And once they master third
grade, they can move on to fourth grade for the second 90 day period. And there
are 93 lessons that take 15 minutes each. That is how students can easily learn
twice as much in only two hours a day. Let's now dive into when it doesn't work.
First, if the student doesn't have the fast math needed for more advanced
material, if they have a memorized addition, subtraction, multiplication and division
tables, they can't learn in two hours. They will have to go back and memorize
them. If the student is in our program, they will automatically be given lessons
and time to memorize these concepts. This is often something new students learn
that the fastest way forward is to go back. Master the basics and then when they
have a strong foundation, more advanced work goes faster. Second, if the student
doesn't engage with the app, if the student refuses to use the app or uses it
incorrectly, like typing DDDD into the math problems, then our system doesn't
work. We see this as a motivation problem and that is what guides do all day.
Motivate and emotionally support students. They will work to find ways to
motivate your child to engage. Third, and probably the most challenging for
our learning to overcome. If parents are not philosophically aligned with the
model, this can cause issues with the student engaging. That is why we believe
is important for parents to get educated about how to our learning works and to
see results so that they can determine if they are excited about supporting
their child to become a self-driven learner or if they prefer a teacher-led
approach. How do we spend the 120 minutes into our learning? We use the
Pomodoro technique of four sessions of 25 minutes each in math, science and
social science, language and writing, and reading. The additional 20 minutes is
predominantly spent on math but includes additional learning concepts. Learn to
learn, test taking strategies, and depth of knowledge exercises. One note,
science and language take up about half the time that math and reading do. Once a
student is finished with our science language material, we give them history,
social science, and writing lessons. There are breaks including recess in the
two hours. What is the student's experience during these two hours? Students go
on to their individual computers and log into a dashboard called dash. Here the
student can see a visual representation of the lessons left in a grade level for
each subject. The Jenga Tower shows the lessons the student has learned and which
ones they have left. Dash also allows a student to set long-term goals and see
the daily goals that need to be met in order to achieve these long-term goals.
This gives students a sense of ownership and control. Parents also have access
to this. Dash allows a student to see if they have finished their daily work via
the daily rings. During two hour learning, students are working in adaptive
apps for each subject. In addition to working at the exact level and pace for the
student, apps also provide multiple ways to present information by having auditory
and video supplementation. This can be especially helpful with younger learners
and students with learning differences. The AI tutor guides students on how to use the
apps to learn helping them when they encounter challenges. It is constantly assessing
and monitoring how a student is progressing through their lessons. How do parents
know what is going on? The great thing about using an AI tutor is that we have
incredibly detailed data on what your child knows and doesn't know. Far more than traditional
school. Parents are finding that trusting a teacher school to self-grade leads to rampant
grade inflation. In fact, 90% of parents believe their student is at grade level. When standardized
tests show that less than 50% of students are. Parents are often surprised by the low PSAT
scores of their A student and end up hiring tutors to compensate. Oftentimes, this is too little
too late. Here is the learning plan that is available to each parent and student at alpha.
It is updated every day. It's like a cat scan of what your child knows and doesn't know.
In the top, we have age grade and knowledge grade. Age grade is the standard grade based on
your child's age. Knowledge grade is the grade level of the material your child is in. When students
transfer into alpha, they often have holes in their knowledge from prior grade levels. They
need to go back and learn or relearn this material to establish their strong mastery foundation.
As you move right, you have the chart that shows how many lessons they have completed in that
grade level and how many they have to go to finish the grade, i.e. what percent complete are they?
Then it shows how many weeks it will take them to finish at their current pace. And for those who
want to finish faster, it shows how many weeks it will take if they do one hour of extra work
a day. This makes finishing a grade tangible and actionable, which allows the student to visualize
achieving the goal. The next section is the test result and contains the two different standardized
tests we use to gauge progress. First, the math test. To remind everyone, this is the third party
test we tell parents to use to hold us accountable to the 2x learning commitment for K-3 rate.
This shows the student's percentile achievement, which measures how much they know relative to
every other student their age. It also shows the percentile growth, which is how fast they are
learning. It then shows the times growth, which is how fast they are learning versus a student
in traditional school. This should be 2x. The second set of test results are the standardized
tests used to show mastery of a grade level. These tests vary by location. In Texas, we use the
Texas star test. In Florida, we use the fast test. We are also adding grade level ISEE and SSAT,
which are national tests for parents who want to benchmark against those. Students have to score
a 90% on these tests to be finished with a grade level. This is our mastery standard, which is
far higher than the state or standard school requirements. The final section focuses on learning
efficiency, which is critical to teaching kids how to learn in just 2 hours a day.
The first section is number of minutes per day. This shows how many minutes the students spent in
each subject each day as well as the percent to target. Are they putting in more or less time
than is required? For most subjects, this is 25 minutes per day. The next section is accuracy.
This is a quality control check. If a student is consistently above 95%, they are not learning
because the material is too easy. If it is consistently below 70%, they are not learning
effectively because it is too hard or they're just guessing it answers. The final section is the
waste meter. This is the percent of time the student is wasting. Our AI tutor watches the
screen and measures if the student is wasting time or not using the apps correctly. This can be
things like not being at the computer, typing in DDDDD into the math answers, not reading the
explanations after missing a question, rapidly guessing it answers, etc. We teach students that
they have to use the apps correctly if they want to finish their academics in just 2 hours per day.
For students who are spending more than 2 hours a day, they often have waste scores above 50%.
We have a set of metric-oriented parents who consider this screen the reason they send their child
alpha. It lets them understand what their child knows and doesn't know at a level of detail
unavailable in the standard teacher in front of the classroom model. As we've seen,
two-hour learning at alpha school isn't just about accelerated academics. It's about giving
students the tools to become lifelong learners, critical thinkers, and well-rounded individuals.
By mastering their studies in just 2 hours a day, our students have more time to develop
crucial life skills, pursue their passions, and enjoy their childhood. We understand that choosing
the right school for your child is one of the most important decisions you'll make. Your child
has unlimited potential. We have the tools to unlock it. Join us in redefining what's possible in
education. Thank you for considering our two-hour learning model and the schools that leverage it to
revolutionize education. We look forward to partnering with you in your child's educational journey.
